---
layout: post
title:  "Is the Trinity Contradictory? The Case of Dale Tuggy"
date:   2017-07-01 04:26:48 -0400
categories: philosophy
---

If one had to choose a teaching of Christianity that caused more
confusion than any other, the leading candidate would likely be the
doctrine of the Trinity. Who has not been told at some point that God is
both one and three, and that, though contradictory, such Christians must
acquiesce for the sake of faith? Critics—both popularizers and sometimes
academics—often hold up the Trinity as an exemplar of Christian
irrationalism, proof that Christians cannot be both reasonable and
faithful.

But the dogma of the Trinity, as disclosed in the life of the Church,
revealed in the Scriptures, developed by the pre-Nicene Church Fathers,
formulated at the councils of Nicaea and Constantinople, and interpreted
by the likes of Boethius and Augustine in the West and the Cappadocians
in the East, does not demand acceptance of either contradiction or blind
faith. As traditionally formulated, the doctrine is not contradictory at
all.

Whence, then, the confusion? For both misguided believers and
ill-informed critics, the answer tends to be that they have mistaken the
elements of Trinitarian doctrine. Many criticisms raised in academia
compound the error with a sort of malpractice of the philosophy of
language, or by simply ignoring the traditional fundamental tenets about
the nature of God

As Aquinas observes, language signifies a conceptual content generally
and is directed toward a specific reality. Sometimes what we say may not
signify much in the conceptual order (as when one asks of an unknown
animal wandering through the back yard: “what is *that*?”). At other
times language can be rich with content but not designate any real
object, as with fairy tales.

This distinction between language’s ability to signify and to designate
makes the difference between the mystery of the Trinity and its
caricature, “mysterianism.” The Trinity is indeed mysterious. But in
acknowledging mystery, we nonetheless grasp our language own about that
mystery. We need not entirely comprehend something to understand what it
is that we might say about that thing. When dogma concerns the mysteries
of God, it may not exhaustively disclose divine things, but we should
not conclude that dogma itself is beyond understanding. As Philip Cary
pithily put it: “Although God is incomprehensible, the doctrine that God
is incomprehensible is not.”

Take, for instance, Dale Tuggy’s criticisms of Trinitarian doctrine.
Tuggy is a philosopher and a Christian at CUNY Fredonia. Tuggy’s work is
instructive, because it exemplifies common assumptions about the Trinity
which—though usually thoughtful and lucid—render the traditional
doctrine unintelligible. Explaining what goes awry in Tuggy’s critique
helps to identify those unspoken presumptions that can occlude what
Trinitarian doctrine actually says. And by clearing away
misunderstandings about the Trinity, we can easily see that Trinitarian
doctrine does not pose any contradictions.

## History, Analyzed

Analytic philosophy has a reputation for Procrustean treatments of
intellectual history. There is some truth to this prejudice—Bertrand
Russell did author *A History of Western Philosophy*, after all—but at
present many analytically trained philosophers do excellent work on
historical figures, either in the form of intellectual history or by
bringing older sources into contemporary debate. These treatments
succeed because they buttress their concern for argumentative rigor with
an understanding of the broader historical and metaphysical frameworks
in which those arguments can be intelligible.

Tuggy’s treatment of the Trinity too often borrows from the Russell’s
school. Certain mistakes result from an inadequate survey of the
Patristic tradition. For instance, Tuggy claims that Christians before
Origen’s authorship of *On First Principles* (c.216-32) thought of the
Word as coming into being at a particular time.[^1] Beyond the obvious
Scriptural ground for the eternity of the Son (Ephesians 7:2, Hebrew
7:24, Revelation 1:8), even a quick skim of the early post-apostolic
fathers shows the Word’s eternity confirmed, for instance in St.
Ignatius (b. 50 AD),[^2] and by the first major Christian systematic
theologian—St. Irenaeus (b. 125 AD).[^3]

Similarly, Tuggy claims that catholic theologians first insisted on the
full divinity of Christ in the fourth century, and he has in mind the
Cappadocian Fathers and Constantinopolitan council. Yet, again, the New
Testament attributes the proper names of God from the Old
Testament—Lord, I am—to Jesus,[^4] and the apostles preached the same
message. St. Irenaeus in the second century declared that “The Father is
Lord, and the Son is the Lord, and the Father Is God, and the Son is
God.” Tertullian (b. 155) remarks that “thus does He \[i.e., the
Father\] make Him \[the Son\] equal to Him \[i.e., the Father\]: for by
proceeding from Himself He became His first-begotten Son, because
begotten before all things.”[^5] And it was Origen of Alexandria who
pioneered not just the language of hypostases to distinguish the Father,
Son, and Spirit, but likely also the term “homoousios”.[^6] And, of
course, the Nicene’s council’s declaration of the Father and Son
possessing the same being, and the description of the Son’s being “true
God from true God” is unmistakable.

Aside from simply overlooking textual evidence, Tuggy pays scant
attention to the close relationship between dogma and practice. Tuggy
claims that “Early on, Christians did not call the Holy Spirit ‘God,’
nor did they worship or pray to the Holy Spirit.” Not only does the
Scripture regard the Holy Spirit as the inner source of Christian
worship (e.g., I Cor. 12:3), the means by which believers receive Christ
and have access to the Father (Eph. 2:18),—but even at the first
generation of Christians, Christians were baptized in the name of the
Father, Son, and Spirit. If baptism does not count as an act of worship,
needless to say, nothing does. Indeed, in the controversies about the
status of the Holy Spirit, those who regarded the Spirit as divine were
able to appeal precisely to the prayers and practices of the Church.

At other times, Tuggy does engage with the primary sources but
misconstrues their meaning. For instance, he argues that St. Augustine
means by the term person “basically … nothing.” In support of this
rather surprising view—given the sheer quantity of pages in which
Augustine talks about what he does mean by the persons of the
Trinity—Tuggy appeals to De Trinitate VII.11, where Augustine says that

> “the only reason, it seems, why we do not call these three together ‘one
person’, as we call them ‘one being’ and ‘one god,’ but say ‘three
persons’ while we never say ‘three gods’ or ‘three beings,’ is that we
want to keep at least one word for signifying what we mean by ‘trinity,’
so that we are not simply reduced to silence when we are asked three
what, after we have confessed that there are three.”[^7]

Applying the distinction between signification and designation, Tuggy
interprets Augustine to mean that the term “person” is used without
signifying anything, while (presumably) designating the Father, Son, and
Spirit. Yet this is clearly not what Augustine is saying. Augustine is
explicitly talking about the difficulty of selecting a Latin term to
signify what is meant by the three “hypostases” (a Greek term) of the
Trinity. The difficulty is that the Latin terms that typically render
ousia and hypostasis, namely essence and substance, do not express a
distinction. They mean more or less the same thing. The Latin term
persona was chosen, as Augustine notes, *not* because it already
includes the connotations Trinitarian doctrine expresses, but simply
because, as Latin lacks any term readymade to express the distinctions
central to the Trinitarian formula, *some* term must be chosen lest
Christians are “simply reduced to silence when we are asked three what.”
This is simply how terms of art are coined.

Augustine makes the context of his remarks—namely, the difficulty of
capturing the Greek in Latin—hard to miss: prior to the passage Tuggy
quotes, one finds Augustine saying “our Greek friends have spoken of one
essence, three substances; but the Latins of one essence or substance,
three persons; because, as we have already said, essence usually means
nothing else than substance in our language, that is, in Latin.” And the
entirety of the passage cited by Tuggy concerns the question of how best
to render the Greek into Latin. Tuggy neglected the linguistic
difficulties that Augustine painstakingly addresses, with the result
that the position he criticizes turns out to be his own
misinterpretation.

## Trinitarian Doctrine

Tuggy summarizes the traditional Trinitarian view as “The Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit are just one thing *and* they are not.”[^8] More
precisely, Tuggy summarized the doctrine of the Trinity as holding that
“The Father is identical to God, the Son is identical to God, and the
Holy Spirit is identical to God, but the Father is not identical to the
Son, the Son is not identical to the Holy Spirit, and the Holy Spirit is
not identical to the Father.”[^9]

Tuggy maintains that the “is” in this formula is an “is” of identity,
and “God” is used in precisely the same way in each instance. Moreover,
Tuggy thinks the term God designates a particular entity, and that
either the terms “Father”, “Son”, and “Holy Spirit” likewise designate
particular entities (resulting in tritheism), or aspects of a single
instance (modalism). Tuggy’s objection is both logical and metaphysical.
It cannot be the case that a=Z, b= Z, and c= Z without a, b, c, and Z
being identical. If Tuggy has accurately captured the doctrine of the
Trinity, then he has demonstrated a logical contradiction and an
incoherent metaphysics.

Although the summary Tuggy provides does not express the classical
Trinitarian dogma, it does state with remarkable clarity some of the
most common misconceptions of Trinitarian doctrine. The misunderstanding
concerns both the language used to articulate the doctrine of the
Trinity (specifically the way in which the term “God” is predicated), as
well as the metaphysical frameworks native to the Patristic period. Let
us consider both of these in turn.

## Language: Predicating Divinity

Orthodox believers call the Father, the Son, the Holy Spirit, and the
Trinity “God”. To employ the distinction we set forth earlier, “God” can
be used to designate the Trinity as a whole, or any person of the
Trinity. “God” signifies the possession of the divine essence in the
subject of which “God” is predicated. Thus, when we predicate “God” of
the Trinity as a whole, or one of the persons, our designation differs
while the conceptual content remains the same.

For this reason, believers do not call the Father “God” in the way that
this author is called “Thomas,” but more in the way that this author is
called human (though with an important difference we will discuss
shortly). The Father is God because he enjoys the fullness of the divine
essence. Likewise, the Son is called God because he too has the fullness
of the divine essence. So too the Holy Spirit. When Christians speak of
“God” in each instance, they mean to signify the same conceptual
content, but designate a distinct reality.

“God”, then signifies one essence, though it can designate any one of
the Persons of the Trinity, or the Trinity itself. So Gilles Emery
observes that in “the *credo* … the Son is ‘God from God.’ Here, the
first name God distinctly designates the Son, while the second clearly
designates the Father.”[^10] Without accounting carefully for the way in
which theological language is actually used, one easily misses what is
going on when Christians use the word “God.” An elementary understanding
of the philosophy of language should be sufficient to dispel this
misconception of the Trinity.

## Metaphysics

However, when any investigation heads down too far down the path of
linguistic questions, we quickly find ourselves in a thicket of
metaphysical questions. Does the traditional doctrine of the Trinity
mean that the persons of the Trinity share an essence in the way that
the author and readers of this article share a certain essence? If we
wish to understand the way the Church Fathers would answer this
question, we must be attuned to the ways in which theologians of the
Patristic era conceived individuation and metaphysical constitution.

For instance: many in the Platonic schools would hold that two human
beings share an identical essence, while the more Aristotelian answer is
perhaps that each man has a similar essence--formally identical but
numerically distinct.

I was once told with the utmost seriousness that I was ridiculous for
buying almond milk, because “everyone knows you cannot milk an almond.”
Missing the background assumptions of a belief or practice makes even
reasonable things seem absurd. One can see a similar confusion when
Tuggy attributes to the Fathers the following difficulty: if Father,
Son, and Spirit share the same essence in the way that humans or dogs
share an essence then “they \[i.e., the persons of the Trinity\] are not
numerically identical to one another, \[and\] the Father and Son are two
different Gods.”

But, of course, in the Patristic era with the welter of scriptural
hermeneutics, middle and neo-Platonism, revived Aristotelianism (etc.),
this is no more a metaphysical problem than almond milk is a scam. If
two physical beings share in the same essence, they are individuated (at
least in part) by their material. Thus, two dogs can equally share the
canine essence while being different dogs because the canine form is
instantiated in different matter.[^11] While it follows for physical
beings that universal essence is instantiated in discrete entities,
matter is necessary to constitute these beings as individuals. Yet God
(qua God) is not a material being. The analogy that humans are to human
nature as the Trinitarian persons are to the divine nature obviously
cannot hold, because material beings relate to their nature in a
fundamentally different way than immaterial beings. Given the insistence
on divine simplicity, there is no distinction between God and divine
nature. The doctrine of divine simplicity is an essential constituent of
Trinitarian theology, not a philosophical roadblock that must be
surmounted. The problem Tuggy attributes to the Church Fathers is no
more a problem than is the proper way to milk an almond.

Which leads to a second, more fundamental metaphysical issue. Tuggy
clearly regards God as a discrete being, a being among other
beings.[^12] While this assumption is normal in the context of analytic
philosophy of religion, it is quite foreign to early Christianity, both
in the theoretical sphere of theology and the practical spheres of
liturgy, prayer, and worship. When Moses asks God for his name, the
answer is given in terms of being: I AM. At least by the time of Isaiah,
the Hebrew Scriptures had secured a firm view of God’s transcendence,
and had firmly distinguished his way of being from that of the gods. The
strong apophaticism of the Old Testament and the consequent prohibition
against idolatry attest that even prior to the Christian era, God cannot
be reduced to a mere being among other beings. Thus, while theologians
may speak of God as a being, they do not predicate “being” in the same
sense of God as they do particular beings in the word. (The analogy of
being is not simply a special exception made for God; as Aquinas argues,
we do not even refer to all worldly beings as beings in the same
sense.[^13])

As David Bentley Hart has vigorously argued, the difference between
polytheists and monotheists has never been how many individuals fall
into a genus of deities. The difference is, rather, that the gods are
beings in the world, usually immortal, that exceed human beings by
degree in their power, beauty, intelligence, and (perhaps) goodness.
God, on the other hand, is not individual of a kind or a being in the
world at all. God’s powers do not exceed those of worldly beings simply
by degree. Whereas gods—if there be any—might share in some common
essence—or might instantiate a specifically identical essence—in God
himself there is no prior essence on which God depends, or which
constitutes him as a kind of entity. This is why the early Christians
can speak of men becoming “gods”—not as joining the Trinity as another
hypostasis, but simply as becoming immortal. Compared to the
monotheistic way, Tuggy’s view regards God not as the eternal Creator
who exceeds all limits, but as a particularly powerful spirit, a
glorified angel—much more a Mormon view of God than a Christian one.

## The One God

Classical monotheism (Christian or otherwise) does not regard God to be
one in the numerical sense. There is not one God in the way there is one
quarter in my pocket or one sitting president of the USA. Numerical
unity is an effect of finitude. Counting presupposes limits. A human
being differs from a dog because the latter is subject to limits the
former is not. Even in the case of one person who is entirely comparable
to the other not only in nature, but also by possessing to the maximal
extent possible the same accidental features, these persons will still
differ because each is limited at a particular time to this material
rather than that of the other. For this reason we can count human
beings. But God is not a physical being and does not have a limited way
of being. It is limitation that enables us to count distinct entities
arithmetically. God’s limitlessness makes arithmetical numbering
inapplicable.[^14]

An atheist might deny the existence of an infinite source of worldly
being, and an analytic philosopher of religion might deny its coherence.
But our objective is to determine what traditional Trinitarians say, and
this requires us to be able to entertain and evaluate the metaphysical
frameworks they employ.

The sense in which God is one is, for the generations that developed
orthodox Trinitiarianism, primarily in terms of metaphysical simplicity.
Or, to put it another way, God is perfectly one, while we—that is,
finite, composite things, are only imperfectly one. Our unity is that of
an individual being, individuated precisely by virtue of the diversity
of our metaphysical constituents.

God, on the other hand, lacks metaphysical composition. There is, in
God, no distinct principle of substance or accident, form or matter,
essence or existence—in short, no potency distinct from act. God cannot,
then, be distinguished from creatures as creatures are distinct from
each other—as one limited thing is distinct from another by virtue of
the distinct limits of each, their finite way of being, their place
within the cosmic order—but as the infinite differs from the finite.
This is, more or less, what the Western Fathers meant when they called
God “being itself” and what the Eastern Fathers meant when they said
that God was “beyond being.”

Christians have articulated this “ontological difference” variously: the
author of Genesis portrays places God above the generation of the world
(unlike, say, the Greek gods), Isaiah declares that the Lord’s thoughts
and ways transcend those of created beings,[^15] God names himself in
terms of Being in the first person in Exodus, St. Paul identifies the
triadic dependence of creatures on God as being from, in, and through
God, St. Irenaeus depicts God as an infinite surplus of being in which
all created things partake as finite participants, St. Augustine
identifies God as ipsum esse (being itself),[^16] Dionysius the
Areopagite places God beyond being,[^17] Aquinas declared God to be the
pure, unrestricted act of existence, and so on. And the notion of God’s
transcendence does not originate with “elite” theologians, but with
God’s revelation of himself in the Old Testament, especially the
prohibition on identifying God with any finite being, any being who
occupies a particular place in the cosmos, as well the necessary logic
of a Creator who is independently of the cosmos, to say nothing of the
liturgical and spiritual practices of the New Testament Church.

Tuggy has little patience for this central aspect of early Christian
thought. In fact, he claims that to deny that God is a being, is to be
an atheist—an accusation, not coincidently, that simply repeats—for more
or less the same reason—the common pagan claims that Christians were
atheists. Both believe in a multiplicity of discrete, humanoid entities
called gods, and both regard the traditional Christian view that places
God outside the order of finite existents as atheism. But if Tuggy (or
his pagan forebears) is correct on this point, then the great
theologians of the Christian tradition—from Moses to Isaiah to Paul,
Irenaeus to Augustine to Aquinas—were atheists. Some theologize in
monastic garb, others in tweed suits, and still others sporting tinfoil
hats.

## Transcendence and Immanence

The specifically Scriptural notion of transcendence is, as Phillip Cary
has pointed out,[^18] essential to understanding the Trinity. In much of
the pagan philosophical traditions (especially the neo-Platonist stream)
and the early Christian heresies (especially the Gnostics and the
Arians), God’s transcendence was modelled on a spatial paradigm:
distance. As the heavens overarch the earth and its denizens, so God
stands above and apart from lower realities—immediately below him stand
the immaterial intellects, then man, then animals and plants, and
finally inanimate matter. Human salvation was often thought of in terms
of ascent, closing the distance from below by freeing the soul from its
bodily boundaries so that it may rise through the aeons; or else in
terms of descent, either through a series of cosmic mediators or by
supplementing philosophical reflection with religious practices (as one
can see in Iamblichus’ defense of theurgy.)

Arius’ insistence that the Son’s role as mediator made him something
less than God but more than a creature can be understood in terms of
this logic of distance. God is—as all other beings in the order of the
world—securely fastened to his place in the cosmic hierarchy. His
transcendence, then, remains a relative transcendence, not differing in
kind from the way one entity transcends another. This sort of
transcendence cannot be reconciled with immanence, and so God stands in
need of intermediary beings that transit the great chain of being on his
behalf.

The Scriptural model of transcendence is, of course, quite different.
God’s transcendence is not that of one entity related to another within
a common world. God creates the world from nothing—and therefore is not
a being in or of the world—and yet “in him we live and move and have our
being.” The act of creation renders God both transcendent to and
imminent within the world. God is not in the world—he is not a discrete
being that is here rather than there, now rather than then, of this sort
rather than that—and yet, as the absolute source of being, all beings
have being by participation in him. God is more interior to things than
they are to themselves. There simply is no distance we need to bridge to
“get to” God.

In salvation history, God does not come into the world from without, as
in Gnostic mythology. Instead, God creates a distance by meeting us in
creaturely form. As in ordinary vision, we do not see the causes of our
seeing, so God escapes notice precisely by virtue of his imminence.
Jesus’ humanity is strange precisely because God now can be
differentiated by the disciples by being over there rather than over
here (on the shore rather than a fishing vessel, for instance).

This Scriptural account resonates both with the philosophical arguments
for God’s existence and nature. God’s transcendence may be gestured at
by the metaphor of transcendence, but it is most usefully articulated
for philosophical discourse in terms of metaphysical simplicity. The
dependence of individuals, which are necessarily composed of act and
potency, on a source that lacks metaphysical composition is subject to
metaphysical demonstration.[^19] If, per impossibile, certain theistic
personalists are correct insist that the Scriptures regard God as a
mutable, finite entity, then it follows that the Scriptural God is not
really a creator, but only a demiurge; that god, like the rest of us,
depends for his being on the absolute; and that we might best leave the
Scriptures for the deeper truths of the philosophers.

## Hypostasis and Ousia

Supposing that God is one in the sense understood in the Patristic
era—not one in the sense of a discrete being, but *the* One—how did the
orthodox believe that God is also three? The debates that led up to the
Nicene and Constantinopolitan Councils were fueled largely by the claims
the Scriptures make about who Christ was—God, Lord, Logos, the revealer
of the Father, one can declare his identity as “I am” and proclaim that
“I and the Father are one.” The author of the Gospel of John begins with
a declaration of the Logos who was in the beginning with God, and indeed
was God, and then reveals Jesus’ identity in dramatic fashion with the
apostle Thomas say to Jesus “my Lord and my God.”

Yet in applying the names of God—Lord, I am—to Jesus, the Scriptures
also maintained a distinction between the Son and Father. Jesus is
portrayed as having been sent from God (indeed, conceived by the Holy
Spirit), attributed a filial relationship with the Father, and regarded
as the visible revelation of the invisible Father.

Christians in the post-apostolic era inherited this peculiar dialectic
of unity and difference, and—especially once the Church began to free
itself from the threat of persecution and had the space to establish its
doctrines in a more precise fashion—felt compelled to explore these
truths in more depth.

The predominate two trends that emerged were conceiving the unity of the
Godhead as merely one in will—as business partners in a joint
venture—or, more radically, as one in being.[^20] The first council of
Nicaea (325 AD) considered various proposals about the Father and Son,
including some intermediate positions—such as Eusebius’ suggestion that
the Father and Son do not possess the same being, but rather, like a
human father and son, possess similar essences (*homoiousios*). But the
Nicene council rejected the Eusebian option in favor of the doctrine
that the Father and Son are of one being, consubstantial, *homoousios*.

What, then, of the diversity of persons? For the Fathers, it cannot be
the case that the Father and Son participate in a separate, subsistent
essence, as some Platonists believed human beings participate in a
subsistent human nature. For all the differences among the contending
parties, no-one thought that the Father was dependent on a higher cause;
and, as we have seen, positing a distinct essence would entail
metaphysical composition. Nor did the orthodox party think that the
Father and Son were but masks of the same individual playing different
roles (as the term persona suggested). They regarded as heresy the
denial of a real and permanent difference between the divine persons,
which they denominated modalism or Sabellianism.

The formula that was settled upon was that there are three hypostases in
one ousia, which was translated, awkwardly, into Latin as one substance
in three persons. Even at the time the language was proposed, it was
understood that the term “persons” was used as a term of art, and that
its ordinary senses—including the notion of a mask or a mere role—would,
taken out of context, be quite misleading. (Tuggy does not take into
account the evolution of the notion of person, and simply
anachronistically attributes a modern notion to the early Christian
period.) This is even more true in the modern era, when—following
Descartes—we tend to think of a person as an individual center of
discursive consciousness, possessed of an independent intellect and
will. Whatever the orthodox formula means, it is most certainly not
that.

But the question remains: how can we maintain that the persons are one
in being and yet really distinct? The answer was given in Scriptural
terms. The Son is begotten of the Father; the Spirit proceeds from the
Father with the Son. The Persons of the Trinity differ—*contra*
Sabellius, really and eternally differ—from one another. And yet,
because the Father gives the whole of his being save what is proper to
his person (namely, being the Source) to the Son, and with the Son the
Spirit, all three persons possess the fullness of divinity. The Son, on
the other hand, is really the full expression of the Father. A contrast
between the Aristotelian notion of relations in substances, on the one
hand, and the Christian notion of divine relations, on the other, is
useful here. A substance for the Aristotelian has its being in itself,
while relations have the status of an accident (that is, a way that a
substance can be, but one that is always a subsequent expression of a
substance, not a constitutive principle). A subsistent relation could
not be more different: the divine persons’ relations constitute their
personhood. An Aristotelian substance is not what it is by virtue of its
relations. The Father is who he is in the eternal act of begetting the
Son and spirating the Spirit, for instance; whereas I would be who I am
regardless of whether or not I penned this article.

There is, then, an element of truth in the subordinationist position,
and we are now in a position to see where they went awry. While it was
perhaps natural to see the processions of the Trinity in terms of a
priority of origination, the subordinationists also asserted a
diminution of divine “content”, similarly to the descent of Plotinus’
hypostases. In the order of origin, the Father *is* prior to the Son and
the Spirit, in the sense that he is their source.[^21] The mistake lies
in inferring that, because the Son and Spirit have their origin the
Father, that they therefore possess only a lesser share of the divine
essence. Yet the Son is who he is by virtue of being the perfect
expression of the Father, and the Holy Spirit likewise subsists as the
perfect love of the Father and Son.

This further contrasts human and divine persons. The difference between
the two is much greater than merely the materiality and finitude of
human beings. “Person” is not predicated univocally of man and God. In
begetting a child, a father and mother do not share the fullness of
their being to their offspring. Being individuated by their respective
material composition, each is a distinct being. On the “Platonic”
interpretation, each is a different participant in a human essence, and
on the Aristotelian view, each possesses a distinct essence. Their
difference is always a distance, and this distance reflects the
imperfection of even the most ardent love. The Trinitarian persons, on
the other hand, share the fullness of divine being; all that the Father
has, he gives the Son and Spirit. Whereas love is for human beings an
accident (that is, an addition to human being, an act or a habit), the
act of love constitutes the essence of the Trinity. The complete and
infinite gift of divine being constitutes the persons as persons; love
is not merely something they may or may not do or have.

The notion of subsistent relations—which is almost entirely absent from
Tuggy’s analysis of classical Trinitarianism—makes clear why the Godhead
may be said to be both diverse (as to persons) and one without
composition. God’s unity—that is, his absolute simplicity—is what makes
the notion of subsistent relations intelligible. There is, in God, no
real distinction between act and potency—and thus no real distinction
between substance and accident—and therefore the action of generation
and spiriting cannot be adventitious to the divine essence, but must be
identified with God’s essence. God’s essence is the infinite Trinitarian
life. God’s essence is action, and is therefore relational—not in spite
of simplicity, but because of it.

## Conclusion

The orthodox formulation does justice to the dynamic of Scriptural
language about God: the unity of the Son and Spirit with the Father, the
Son’s claims of divinity, the diversity implied in the Son being sent
from the Father and the Spirit breathed forth, the baptismal rite, and
the insistence of the Shema: the Lord is one.

These arguments, I expect, will not convince the atheist or the analytic
theologian equipped with impoverished philosophies of language and being
that the Trinity in fact exists. But our aim has been more modest: to
discern whether the doctrine of the Trinity, as expounded by the Church
Fathers, asserts contradictory propositions. The only answer that can be
given once a cursory examination of the original doctrine has been
undertaken is negative.

Though I have not attempted to argue that one should believe in the
Trinity, a few words on the Christians grounds for belief in the Trinity
are not entirely out of place. Most theologians regard the Trinity as
something revealed, or something for which merely probable arguments can
be given, rather than something that can be philosophically demonstrated
in the strict sense. That is to say that Christians believe that God
has, in history, revealed the Trinity to us in a Trinitarian way: the
Church is moved by the Holy Spirit to the Christ, in whom we are
incorporated and through whom we see the Father. The Trinity stands,
then, on both sides of revelation: as both--the revealing and what is
revealed. The Holy Spirit is given by the Son after the ascension to the
Church, to form the heart of worship and to guide the Church into truth.

The Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are found primarily and concretely in
the life and experience of the Church. This can be articulated by
theologians (including the authors of Scripture) through second order
reflection. But the grounds for the Christian doctrine of the Trinity
are—thankfully—not so sterile as Tuggy seems to imagine: extracting
propositional content from the Scriptures (without much use for the
living context from which Scripture arises and in which it is
understood) and seeing what can and cannot be deducted therefrom.

The Scriptures, as read by Christians, are rooted in the life of the
Church, a life animated and guided by the Holy Spirit, just as the
progression of the seed to the tree is guided by a vital principle. The
Scriptures themselves proclaim the living church to be the pillar and
ground of truth. It is under this guidance and in this form of life that
the truths intimated in Scripture are unfolded. One might not believe
the Church to be actually animated by the Spirit of God (if one is an
atheist), or else one might prefer to think of Christianity as a set of
beliefs—as mental microbes or memes—that can be severed from their place
in the concrete, organic life of Christ’s living body. Revelation—and
the revelation of the Trinity in particular—is not primarily understood
by Christians (traditionally and for the most part) to be the divine
dispensation of propositions that reason could not provide, and which
Christians should accept axiomatically; rather, revelation is given in
the life of the Church—the ongoing experience of the gift and guidance
of the Holy Spirit animating its structures of church authority,
scriptures, rituals, intellectual life, and political history (as messy
as that might be).

[^1]: Dale Tuggy, “Ten Steps Towards Getting Less Confused About the
    Trinity \#6 Get a Date, Part 2”, www.trinities.org/blog.

[^2]: St. Ignatius, *Letter to Polycarp* 3:2.

[^3]: St. Irenaeus, *Against Heresies* II.13:8.

[^4]: For an accessible (and sometimes needlessly skeptical) scholarly
    survey of the uses of the Old Testament designation of God in the
    New Testament, see Raymond Brown’s *Introduction to New Testament
    Christology*.

[^5]: Tertullian, *Against Praxeas* ch.7.

[^6]: *See* M.J. Edwards, "Did Origen Apply the Word homoousios to the
    Son?", Journal of Theological Studies 49,578-590 (summarizing the
    historical evidence).

[^7]: St. Augustine, *De Trinitate* VII.11, quoted in Dale Tuggy, “10
    Steps toward getting less confused about the Trinity - \#5 “Persons”
    – Part 1,” [www.trinities.org/blog](http://www.trinities.org/blog).

[^8]: “The Unfinished Business of Trinitarian Theorizing”, p. 172.

[^9]: “Unfinished Business”, p. 172.

[^10]: Gilles Emery, *The Trinity* 48.

[^11]: The precise role of matter in the constitution of physical
    objects differs, of course, both across the great philosophical
    traditions of the time and within them. Yet matter would almost
    always have played individuating forms, even if the precise
    relationship of matter to form could differ widely.

[^12]: To put it more precisely, Tuggy regards “being” as univocally
    predicated of God and creature.

[^13]: *See* John Wippel, *The Metaphysical Thought of Aquinas* , p. 91.

[^14]: See Aquinas’ lucid discussion at *Summa Theologiae* I, q. 30,
    art. 2 and I, q 42, art 1.

[^15]: Isaiah 55:8, 9

[^16]: *City of God,* XII, 2.

[^17]: *Divine Names* XIII.3

[^18]: Phillip Cary, “On Behalf of Classical Trinitarianism: A Critique
    of Rahner on the Trinity”, *Thomist* (56:3) 365.

[^19]: See, e.g., Joseph Owens, *An Elementary Christian Metaphysics*;
    Robert Spitzer, *New Proofs for the Existence of God*; St. Thomas
    Aquinas, *On Being and Essence* for examples. For my reformulation
    of certain of these arguments, see
    <http://www.thomasmcothran.com/argument-for-existence-of-god/>.

[^20]: Khaled Anatolios has a lucid account in his *Retrieving Nicaea*.

[^21]: It is, of course, important not to understand causation here on
    the model of causation in creatures, whereby causes are greater than
    effects. Causation in the Trinity refers to the Father as the
    principle and ungenerated source of the Son and Spirit. For this
    reason, Latin theologians often tend to prefer speaking of a
    principle rather than a cause.
