---
layout: post
title: "Hasker's Methodology: Nescience and Deferral""
date: 2017-10-20 04:26:40 -0400
categories: [philosophy, philosophy of religion, series]
tags: [hasker on simplicity, analytic philosophy]
---

Hasker's constructive argument prominently features two methods:
declarations of personal nescience and the suggestion that something is
awry with views of his opponents with the immediate remark that that
issue will be set aside. These methodological deficiencies are worth
noting, because they are not unique to Hasker, but are widely deployed
in analytic philosophy of religion.

Personal Nescience
------------------

Hasker uses the personal nescience tactic as both an offensive and
defensive. On defense, Hasker puts forward a syllogisms with premises
such as "God is a conscious mental subject", and is largely content to
support this premise--one that is central to the dispute--by claiming he
cannot understand how anyone could disagree. "I find it difficult to see
how anyone could regard any of the premises in this argument as
seriously open to question."[^13] But of course the question in dispute
is whether God is a conscious mental subject.[^14] That Hasker cannot
even conceive how one could disagree with him is connected, in large
part, to the neglect of the traditional arguments in the course of his
article. And, for Hasker's readership, the less familiarity one has with
the sources of this debate, the less one can see why anyone would take
up the traditional view against Hasker.

Confessions of intellectual myopia are not used merely to the defense
Hasker's own views; they crop up frequently in his critique of others.
Citing Stump's exposition of St. Thomas' notions of identity, which in
her view resolve some apparent problems in the objections to divine
simplicity, Hasker confesses "far as I can see her proposals fail to
resolve the problems with simplicity that are discussed in this
essay."[^15] His reply to W. Matthew Grant's essay, which is directly on
point for most of the criticisms Hasker advances? "I do not see,
however, that Grant provides any resources for answer the argument given
in the text."[^16] And, in place of a critique that sets forth the
rudiments of knowledge as traditionally predicated of God, Hasker is
content to say "'Knowledge' that involves no distinctive intrinsic state
of the knower is, it seems to me, simply unintelligible."[^17]

The argument from personal nescience has several rhetorically
advantageous properties. The less one understands the matter of dispute,
the greater the scope of application. The work of an author is
simplified, for achieving a systematic presentation of the opposing
positions decreases the scope of one's personal ignorance. Moreover,
from the side of the readership, any accurate presentation has the
unfortunate effect of one's readership beginning to grasp the
alternative. And, finally, the argument from personal nescience has this
advantage: if the author makes a mistake in his presentation of the
alternatives, how can he be blamed? After all, it is too complex, too
esoteric to be understandable--and the fact the author's mistake just
proves the point!

Deferral
--------

Hasker's other tactic is to allege something awry with the subjects of
his critique only to defer that issue for another time. Simply flagging
points of disagreement for discussion at some future date is not in
itself objectionable. However, Hasker defers the two most crucial points
for getting a handle on the traditional notion of simplicity: the
identity of being and essence in God, and the notion of accident and
extrinsic denomination.

### Identity of Being and Essence

St. Thomas understands metaphysical composition in terms of act-potency
correlates. A being is composite if it is a composed of potentiality and
a corresponding actuality; otherwise it is simple. While St. Thomas
thinks that bodily existents are composed of form and matter, the
ultimate composition that distinguishes created things from God is the
distinction between being and thing, existence and essence. For St.
Thomas and his progeny, metaphysical simplicity just is the denial of a
real distinction between a thing and its being; it is the assertion that
what something is is being. Composite beings, on the other hand, have
being, but they are not their being. Created things exist, but are not
their existence; they have existence, but do not exhaust its content;
they have a nature, they have being, but their nature is not being.[^18]

Given that St. Thomas' account of simplicity is in his view--and in the
view of several of the writers Hasker is engaging--established by the
existence-essence distinction, one would think that Hasker would counter
with an argument. Instead, Hasker simply brushes the existence-essence
distinction aside as a "possible example" of a category mistake;
asserting that, in any event, it "certainly looks like a category
mistake, but there are complications here and we won't pursue this
example."[^19]

### Accident and Extrinsic Denomination

The second essential point necessary to understand the traditional
articulation of divine simplicity is how St. Thomas approaches accidents
and predicates. Not every predicate is a real accident. An accident is
some formal act to which a subject stands in potency. I have the
capacity to learn French; a labrador does not. If I become fluent in
French, I have both a formal perfection and a potentiality to further
act: conversing in French. The developed ability to speak French does
not belong to me by nature, and it is something that changes me. Thus,
it is an accident.

"French-speaking" is also a predicate. That is, one can assert "Jane
speaks French." And in this case, there is a real accident that does
correspond to the predicate, if the statement is true. Yet predicates do
not, as a general rule, entail accidents. Some entail natures: "Alice is
a cat." Some predicates are grounded in relations that are in turn
grounded in predicates. In the statement "Ann is taller than Beth",
"taller than Beth" is predicated of Ann by virtue of a relation grounded
in an accident: in this case, her height. Ann's height is a real
accident. Yet if Ann is an older sister, and Beth grows to be taller,
the predicate "taller than Beth" can no longer be predicated of Ann,
despite no real change in Ann.

Some relative predicates are grounded in causal relationships. Take "the
spider startled Jeffrey". The predicate "startled Jeffrey" can be
predicated of the spider, without the spider being affected in any way.
If Jeffrey does not overreact, the spider may continue on his merry way,
unobstructed and oblivious of Jeffrey. So the predicate "startled
Jeffrey" may be true of the spider, without implying any change or
accident in the spider itself. "The sun killed the plant" is a similar
example: nothing inherent to the sun changes in killing the plant

This turns out to be critical to understanding how things are predicated
of God. If we say "God created the world", an elementary understanding
of predication its relation to accidents shows us that this need not
imply no more change in God than it does a spider. Moreover, St. Thomas
has been at pains to set out the sense in which terms like "knowledge",
"action", "love", "will" etc. are predicated of God.

Unfortunately, Hasker pays little attention to this notion of accidents
and their relation to predication. The subject comes up briefly:

> "Stump's way of addressing this is by a discussion of the medieval
> notion of an 'accident,' which she argues is not the same as our
> modern notion of an accidental property .... So for God to create
> individuals instead of others he might equally well have created is
> not an 'accident' in God and is not inconsistent with God's
> simplicity. (I omit here a discussion of the sense of 'accident' Stump
> attributes to Aquinas, as this is complex and not altogether clear.)"

As we see later in the series, Hasker's argument that divine simplicity is confuses categories and commits logical errors can be accounted for by his failure to reckon with these two central points: the existence-essence distinction, and the role of accidents, especially as the latter relates to predication. Moreover, a great deal of what Hasker confesses seems inexplicable or implausible to him *is* inexplicable or implausible without adequately dealing with the fundamental structures of being: essence and existence, subject and accident.


[^13]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", pp. 712 - 713.

[^14]: If this remark seems puzzling, recall that a subject is one
    actualized by accidents; and that in the case of knowing, our
    possible intellects are actualized by the forms of things. Our
    knowledge is passive. But for the traditional view, God's knowledge
    is not passive but active, not receptive but creative. God is not a
    subject that receives forms, and hence not a conscious subject.

[^15]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 703.

[^16]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 713.

[^17]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 712.

[^18]: The best short overview on the subject is St. Thomas' **De
    Ente**.

[^19]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 703.

