---
layout: post
author: 'Thomas M. Cothran'
title: William Hasker on Divine Simplicity
categories: 
  - philosophy 
  - essay
excerpt: In "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake", William Hasker argues that "the strong doctrine of divine simplicity **is** a mistake, one from which theology needs to be liberated." With this sweeping charter, Hasker proceeds to critique the "traditional strong doctrine of divine simplicity, attributed to Aquinas and before him to Augustine."
---

In "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake",[^1] William Hasker argues that "the
strong doctrine of divine simplicity **is** a mistake, one from which
theology needs to be liberated."[^2] With this sweeping charter, Hasker
proceeds to critique the "traditional strong doctrine of divine
simplicity, attributed to Aquinas and before him to Augustine."[^3] The
strong notion of divine simplicity is, in Hasker's view, riddled
throughout with category errors, logical failures, the "dehumanization"
of God, and departures from the broader traditional understanding of
God's character.

Through a Secondary Source Darkly
=================================

Hasker begins with certain qualifications. His purpose lies not in
settling a historical question in the history of thought, but in
engaging with that history of thought on the substance of the matter at
hand.

> I recognize, of course, that it is often important to establish as
> accurately as possible the exact views of some historical figure, even
> though this will not be the purpose of the present essay. But once
> that has been done, this accomplishment is merely preliminary to
> raising the question: Do we have good reason either to agree or to
> disagree with the thinker in question?[^4]

That Hasker is not engaged in historical research is clear from
selection of interlocutors. Neither St. Augustine nor historian of his
through merits examination.[^5] St. Thomas Aquinas receives more
attention, but primarily through contemporaries who draw on St. Thomas
in the context of current debates.[^6] Hasker does not examine either
Augustine's or Aquinas' accounts of what he means by the terms "will",
"knowledge", "love", "action". And although Hasker does quote Aquinas'
account of what he terms "simple simplicity",[^7] he does not set forth
a clear statement Aquinas' (or Augustine's) formulations of the strong
version from which he seeks to liberate theology.

Nor does Hasker address the key components of the metaphysical framework
necessary to explain the traditional notion of divine simplicity, at
least in the work of St. Augustine or St. Thomas. He raises the St.
Thomas' postulate of the identity of God's existence and essence only to
say suggest it may involve a confusion of categories and quickly move
on, saying "we won't pursue this example."[^8] As any reader of St.
Thomas knows, St. Thomas' formulation of divine simplicity turns on the
identity of existence and essence in God,[^9] and any treatment of
divine simplicity that does not address the existence-essence
distinction does not address Aquinas' notion of simplicity. And Hasker
raises a number of questions that Aquinas himself raises as objections
and then answers; yet Hasker does so without indication of those
discussions. For instance, Hasker asks, if God is *actus purus*, "how
can he be free?"[^10] without giving any sign that Aquinas raises the
question and offers an answer in a number of places.[^11]

Had Hasker not held himself out as correcting the traditional views of
Augustine and Aquinas, the neglect of what Augustine and Aquinas
actually said would not be objectionable. Were Hasker's purpose simply
to limit his criticism to the recent and narrow confines of analytic
philosophy of religion where St. Augustine and St. Thomas have colored
the debate, little treatment of their views would be necessary on
Hasker's part.

Hasker, however, does not withhold judgment on Augustine or Aquinas, and
verdicts on their conclusions come thick and fast. His goal, after all,
is extravagant: to "liberate theology". He does not hesitate to
pronounce a verdict on Aquinas' motivation for the doctrine of
simplicity[^12], or to declare that truthmaker theory represents a
genuine advance in the traditional argument for simplicity,[^13] or to
identify logical deficiencies in the traditional formulations of
simplicity,[^14] to announce "we need to grasp the problem \[of divine
cognition\] as it is conceived by Aquinas and his followers"[^15], and
to lay out "Aquinas' perspective" on the individuation of actions.[^16]
That Hasker is targeting the view of St. Thomas is clear both from the
judgments he makes in the course of his article and in the light of his
overall purpose. Unfortunately this lets the paucity and inaccuracy of
Hasker's treatment of St. Thomas' views undermine his entire argument.
And I, like Hasker, in employing the shorthand of the "traditional view
of divine simplicity" be referring primarily to the tradition stemming
from St. Thomas.

Methodological Objects: Nescience and Deferral
==============================================

Hasker's constructive argument prominently features two methods:
declarations of personal nescience and raising objections only to defer
discussion of their merits. The former methodological deficiency is
worth noting, because is hardly unique to Hasker, but are widely
deployed in analytic philosophy of religion. The latter is worth noting
because Hasker defers the very questions most vital to evaluating the
truth of the traditional doctrine of divine simplicity.

Personal Nescience
------------------

Personal nescience serves Hasker's argument both as an offensive and
defensive tactic. On defense, Hasker puts forward a syllogisms with
premises such as "God is a conscious mental subject", and is largely
content to support this premise by claiming he cannot understand how
anyone could disagree. "I find it difficult to see how anyone could
regard any of the premises in this argument as seriously open to
question."[^17] But of course a central matter in dispute concerns
whether God is a conscious mental subject.[^18] That Hasker cannot even
conceive how one could disagree with him is connected, is not merely
Hasker reporting on his psychological state. Hasker's inability to
visualize that the opposition disagrees seems to result from his
deferrals of essential components of the opposing view, as we shall see
shortly.

Confessions of intellectual myopia crop up frequently in his critique of
others. Citing Stump's exposition of St. Thomas' notions of identity,
which in her view resolve some apparent problems in the objections to
divine simplicity, Hasker confesses "far as I can see her proposals fail
to resolve the problems with simplicity that are discussed in this
essay."[^19] His reply to W. Matthew Grant's essay, which is directly on
point for most of the criticisms Hasker advances? "I do not see,
however, that Grant provides any resources for answer the argument given
in the text."[^20] And, in place of a critique that sets forth the
rudiments of knowledge as traditionally predicated of God, Hasker
replies "'knowledge' that involves no distinctive intrinsic state of the
knower is, it seems to me, simply unintelligible."[^21] Where personal
nescience served on defense as an attempt to assert the indubitability
of Hasker's premises, here it serves an offensive function. Hasker
attempts to motivate the opinion that the traditional arguments for
divine simplicity are unintelligible because he has not made sense of
them.

The argument from personal nescience lacks philosophical significance,
but it does have several rhetorically advantageous properties. As a
general principle, the less one understands, the more one can apply
one's personal nescience. The work of an author is simplified. A
systematic presentation of the opposing view decreases the scope of
one's nescience, which defeats the purpose of the tactic. And the
argument from personal nescience has this useful advantage: if the
author makes a mistake in his presentation of the alternatives, how can
he be blamed? He can immediately claim the opposing view too complex,
too esoteric, too unintelligible--and cite his own error in proof of
that point. Careful philosophical consideration is inimical to such a
strategy.

Deferral
--------

Hasker's other tactic is to allege problems with traditional view only
to indefinitely defer a defense of that allegation. Simply flagging
points of disagreement for discussion at some future date is not in
itself objectionable. However, Hasker defers points critical to
understanding the traditional doctrine of divine simplicity. The two
most crucial points for getting a handle on the traditional notion of
simplicity concern the identity of being and essence in God, and the
notion of accident and extrinsic denomination. We consider each in turn,
showing how Hasker evades consideration of these points and why they are
critical.

### Identity of Being and Essence

St. Thomas understands metaphysical composition in terms of act-potency
correlates. A being is composite if it is a composed of potentiality and
a corresponding actuality; otherwise it is simple. While St. Thomas
thinks that bodily existents are composed of form and matter, the
ultimate composition that distinguishes created things from God is the
distinction between being and thing, existence and essence. For St.
Thomas and his progeny, metaphysical simplicity just is the denial of a
real distinction between a thing and its being. Composite beings have
being, but they are not identical with being. Created things exist, but
are not their existence; they have existence, but do not exhaust its
content; they have a nature, they have being, but their nature is not
being.[^22]

Given that St. Thomas' account of simplicity is in his view--and in the
view of several of the writers Hasker is engaging--articulating the
existence-essence distinction, one would think that Hasker would counter
with an argument. Instead, Hasker simply brushes the existence-essence
distinction aside as a "possible example" of a category mistake;
asserting that, in any event, it "certainly looks like a category
mistake, but there are complications here and we won't pursue this
example."[^23]

### Accident and Extrinsic Denomination

The second point necessary to understand the traditional articulation of
divine simplicity concerns St. Thomas' approach to accidents and
predicates. Not every predicate is a real accident. An accident is some
formal act to which a subject stands in potency. I have the capacity to
learn French; a labrador does not. If I become fluent in French, I have
both a formal perfection and a potentiality to further act: conversing
in French. The developed ability to speak French does not belong to me
by nature, and it is something that changes me. Thus, it is an accident.

"French-speaking" is also a predicate. That is, one can assert "Jane
speaks French." And in this case, there is a real accident that does
correspond to the predicate, if the statement is true. Yet predicates do
not necessarily entail accidents. Some entail natures: "Alice is a cat."
Some predicates are grounded in relations that are in turn grounded in
intrinsic accidents. In the statement "Ann is taller than Beth", "taller
than Beth" is predicated of Ann by virtue of a relation grounded in an
accident: in this case, her height. Ann's height is a real accident. Yet
if Ann is an older sister, and Beth grows to be taller, the predicate
"taller than Beth" can no longer be predicated of Ann, despite no
imminent change in Ann herself.

Some predicates are grounded in causal relationships. Take "the spider
startled Jeffrey". The predicate "startled Jeffrey" can be predicated of
the spider, without the spider being undergoing any intrinsic change. If
Jeffrey does not overreact, the spider may continue on his way,
unobstructed and oblivious of Jeffrey. So the predicate "startled
Jeffrey" may be true of the spider, without implying any change or
accident in the spider itself. "The sun killed the plant" is a similar
example: nothing inherent to the sun changes in killing the plant.

This turns out to be critical to understanding how things are predicated
of God. If we say "God created the world", an elementary understanding
of predication its relation to accidents shows us that this need not
imply no more change in God than it does a spider or the sun. Moreover,
St. Thomas has been at pains to set out the sense in which terms like
"knowledge", "action", "love", "will" etc. are predicated of God.

Unfortunately, Hasker pays little attention to this notion of accidents
and their relation to predication. The subject comes up briefly:

> "Stump's way of addressing this is by a discussion of the medieval
> notion of an 'accident,' which she argues is not the same as our
> modern notion of an accidental property .... So for God to create
> individuals instead of others he might equally well have created is
> not an 'accident' in God and is not inconsistent with God's
> simplicity. (I omit here a discussion of the sense of 'accident' Stump
> attributes to Aquinas, as this is complex and not altogether clear.)"

Hasker's Presentation of the Arguments for Divine Simplicity
============================================================

What of Hasker's presentation of the arguments for divine simplicity? At
a minimum, a philosophical presentation should present those arguments
for an opposing position which the opposition regards as the strongest,
and, needless to say, it should do so accurately. Does Hasker meet this
minimum? Hasker presents two arguments: an argument from the
multiplicity of the forms, and an argument from the dependence of a
whole on its parts. The first argument is simply not one advanced by any
of Hasker's primary interlocuters; though Augustine makes brief
appearances and a citation to an essay by Brian Leftow mentioning
Augustine's motivations is mentioned, neither Augustine nor a similarly
Platonist stand-in features prominently in those writers with whom
Hasker is engaged. So we can happily grant that the multiplicity of
subsistent forms is not a useful one for establishing divine simplicity,
unless one is arguing with a certain type of Platonist.

The second argument for divine simplicity is relevant to the remainder
of Hasker's discussion, but he both misstates and misunderstands it. The
argument is taken from the following passage in St. Thomas' *Summa
Contra Gentiles* I.18:

> Every composite ... is subsequent to its components. The first being,
> therefore, which is God, has no components. Every composite,
> furthermore, is potentially dissoluble. This arises from the nature of
> composition.... Now, what is dissoluble can not be. This does not
> befit God, since he is through himself the necessary being.[^24]

Hasker immediately glosses this passage: "Aquinas lucidly explains the
basis for an important claim made by the doctrine of simplicity: namely,
God is not assembled out of parts and cannot be decomposed into
parts."[^25] Yet this is not what St. Thomas says. He does not refer to
parts, but to components (*componentibus*), and the difference is clear
in the immediate context that Hasker omits. *SCG* 18 is about whether
God is composite, and Aquinas quickly says: "In every composite there
must be act and potency."[^26] St. Thomas is explicitly speaking here of
components in the sense of act-potency correlates.[^27]

Here we see the relevance of the essence-existence distinction that
Hasker defers. For if in things there is a real distinction between what
a thing is and its act of existing, then we have components in sense
that Aquinas is using the word *componentibus*. Aquinas' motivation here
is unabashedly metaphysical, and articulated in view of the
existence-essence distinction that runs through the entirety of his
metaphysics. It arises not from the vagaries of common sense and the
concomitant ambiguous notion of parts to which Hasker appeals, but from
a strict demonstration.[^28] Because Hasker does not have this in view,
he misstates what St. Thomas' argument actually is, and as a result
neither of the two main arguments of divine simplicity Hasker sets forth
are relevant.

Specific Critiques of Divine Simplicity
=======================================

Hasker divides his critiques of "strong" divine simplicity into a)
category mistakes, b) logical failures, and c) the dehumanization of
God. We begin by attempting to determine what Hasker takes "strong
simplicity" to be. He believes that the problematic transition from
"simple simplicity" to "strong simplicity" is that the latter rejects
"any sort of internal distinction whatsoever in God, including
distinctions which cannot at all reasonably be considered as indicating
'components' of which God is assembled or into which God can be
decomposed."[^29] Hasker provides no citation here of who makes this
extension, perhaps because this is not the traditional notion of divine
simplicity. But it is evident that he regards this view as the one held
by St. Thomas, and even elsewhere makes the wildly incorrect claim that
St. Thomas rejected a real distinction in God with respect to the
Trinitarian persons.[^30] (In fact, St. Thomas clearly affirms a real
relation between the persons in God, and regards any denial of this
point as heresy.[^31]) The traditional notion of divine simplicity,
which St. Thomas explicitly states in the part of the *SCG* passage
cited by Hasker, consists precisely in the denial that God is composed
of act and potency.

Category mistakes
-----------------

Hasker's primary example of a category mistake is the identify of God
with his actions. Says Hasker, "we are told, God is *identical* with his
action of parting the Red Sea."[^32] The culprit who misinformed Hasker
goes unnamed; traditional adherents to the doctrine clearly assert
otherwise. God is identical with his own act of being, yet the *actus
essendi* of finite things are different acts distinct from God. These
acts are caused by God, and St. Thomas deploys a sophisticated notion of
instrumentality to explain them as God's actions; but they are
nevertheless extrinsic to God.[^33] The difference between God willing
some event or not is not in God, it is in the world, and if one cannot
see that, one has missed the whole point and God is conceived as no more
than one more wistful soul (albeit gifted with super-powers) struggling
to have his way.

Hasker believes that the sort of truthmaker theory advanced by Brower
and widely accepted in contemporary philosophy vitiates some of the
conceptual confusions that plague traditional theists. And he pronounces
the verdict: "this truthmaker interpretation represents a genuine
advance in formulating the doctrine of divine simplicity, one that
advocates of that doctrine would be well advised to embraced."[^34] To
which those advocates may well respond that the salient point was
grasped long ago, and articulated perfectly well by, say, St. Thomas'
instructions to beginners.

> The various names applied to God are not synonymous, even though they
> signify what is in reality the same thing in God. In order to be
> synonymous, names must signify the same thing, and besides must stand
> for the same intellectual. conception. But when the same object is
> signified according to diverse aspects, that is, notions which the
> mind forms of that object, the names are not synonymous. For then the
> meaning is not quite the same, since names directly signify
> intellectual conceptions, which are likenesses of things. Therefore,
> since the various names predicated of God signify the various
> conceptions our mind forms of Him, they are not synonymous, even
> though they signify absolutely the same thing.[^35]

Truthmaker theory does not, as Hasker sees it, clear away all the
category confusions. He things that "*relational* predications, such as
'God created the universe' or 'God loves King David'" still pose a
problem, but he defers that to his discussion of logical failures.[^36]

Logical failures
----------------

Hasker claims to identify "the logical inability of the doctrine \[of
divine simplicity\], in its traditional form, to accommodate assertions
about God that are nearly universally accepted among theistic
philosophers and theologians, *including the adherents of divine
simplicity*."[^37] More specifically, Hasker thinks he has discovered in
the cases of God's knowledge of contingent facts and God's willing
particular events a fundamental incoherence.

If God is pure act, God cannot have multiple intrinsic acts of thought.
On this point Hasker is correct. Divine simplicity entails that God does
not have a multiplicity of intrinsic acts, whether of will, or
knowledge, or anything else. Because Hasker has not examined the
relevant arguments for divine simplicity, he has only one option: to
show a logical inconsistency between God's knowledge and his simplicity.
If there is a logical error lurking within the doctrine of divine
simplicity, the doctrine cannot be true; if, on the other hand, there is
not a logical error, then determining the truth of the doctrine turns on
the exact arguments Hasker has evaded.

### God's knowledge

Hasker raises two primary objections to way divine simplicity has been
reconciled to divine knowledge. First, if God knows things by knowing
his essence, he can only know possibilities, not actualities. Second,
the claim that God's knowledge of contingent facts entails nothing about
his inner state is both unintelligible and contrary to the nature of a
conscious mental subject (a category which for Hasker includes God). The
latter question Hasker raises again in the context of divine action, and
we, like he, will address the issue there.

Hasker relies on James Dolezal to relay the traditional view that in
knowing his own essence, God knows all contingent things. Hasker
counters by declaring that

> What a knowledge of divine essence gives us--and gives God--is a
> knowledge of the realm of creaturely *possibility*; what it does not
> and cannot give us is knowledge concerning which of these
> possibilities are actual.^20^ What is actual but contingent does not
> follow from what is possible; that is the nature of possibility and
> actuality. Only if the divine nature contained within itself, not only
> the myriad realm of possibilities, but the specification of which
> possibilities are to be actualized, could that nature be by itself an
> adequate vehicle for knowledge of the created world. But this would
> mean that all actual creaturely objects and state of affairs are as
> necessary as the divine essence itself, a conclusion that would be
> welcome to Spinoza, but not, one would think, to an orthodox
> theist.[^38]

At footnote 20, Hasker claims that "On this point Aquinas agrees",
citing *SCG* I.81.4. Yet St. Thomas clearly does not believe that God's
self-knowledge renders only knowledge of creaturely possibilities. Nor
does he agree, as Hasker assumes that we can comprehend the divine
essence. Hasker's implicit argument seems motivated by the assumption
that while we may know what God is, that knowledge does not give us
knowledge of which creaturely possibilities in fact are, and therefore
God's knowledge his essence yields no more. Yet St. Thomas rejects the
premise, holding that "we cannot know what God is, but rather what He is
not."[^39] Because God is infinite, and our acts of understanding are
finite, we cannot comprehend of God's essence. So our knowledge of God,
which proceeds indirectly, cannot yield knowledge of actuality of
creatures. The notion that our knowledge of God fails to entail anything
about the concrete goings on in the world has no bearing on whether
God's self-knowledge in fact does.

Hasker's claim that St. Thomas counts God's knowledge of himself
insufficient for knowledge of the concrete actualities in the world is
contrary to every one of St. Thomas' statements on the subject. St.
Thomas treats this exact question so many times and at such great
length[^40] that one is at a loss to see how his meaning could be
mistaken.

We need not even grasp all the details where St. Thomas rejects what
Hasker says he affirms. A general understanding of St. Thomas' thought
sufficiently explains his doctrine. Existence makes the difference
between a thing and nothing. God is existence subsisting, and things
exist by participation in him. God's knowledge of himself is inclusive
of knowledge of what participates in him. Given that what makes a
singular thing be is its participation in being, and it is that
participation which renders a thing known by God, it follows
straightforwardly from St. Thomas' framework that God knows singular
things, not merely general possibility. The only way to mistake St.
Thomas on this point is the misinterpretation of being as possibility
rather than act, and one could not get St. Thomas more backward than
that.

Hasker says that "only if the divine nature contained within itself, not
only the myriad realm of possibilities, but the specification of which
possibilities are to be actualized, could that nature be by itself an
adequate vehicle for understanding the world."[^41] The "specification"
that makes the difference between possibility and actuality is, for St.
Thomas, existence; and St. Thomas' central metaphysical claim about God
is that he is by nature existence. Hasker's claim that the presence of
this specification in God renders the being of things necessary is given
without supporting argument, or any consideration of the many places
where St. Thomas considers this exact point.

The point here is not merely that Hasker mistakes the traditional view,
but that his allegation of a logical contradiction is premised upon that
very mistake. If God is subsisting existence--pure act--and he knows how
he is participated, then he knows not only what could be, but what
actually is. What does not take part in existence does not exist, and so
if that participation entails divine knowledge, then God's knowledge of
singulars is exhaustive.

The primary difficulty Hasker has lies in imagining what it is like for
God to know. He tries to imagine what it would be like to grasp
everything in a single act of cognition and comes up blank. This is not,
on St. Thomas' account, because of Hasker's limitations, but rather the
limitations of human cognition. Human beings, according to St. Thomas,
do not comprehend God, God is identical with his act of knowledge, and
so human beings do not comprehend God's act of knowledge. This does not,
however, imply a retreat into mystery, for we do not need to imagine
what it is like for God to know to affirm that he does, any more than it
is necessary to understand what it feels like for a bat to navigate to
affirm that it in fact does. Knowledge is, on St. Thomas account, the
immaterial comprehension of form; and if God is subsistent being, he
comprehends everything that is.

Although we cannot know what it is like for God to know, we nevertheless
find strong indications that higher modes of knowledge tend to be more
unified. The child learns that `1 + 1 = 2`, and that `2 + 1 = 3`. The
two are discrete facts, relatively unconnected. But as the child
advances to understand the principles of arithmetic, the notion of
integers and of addition is grasped in principle, and the child performs
an act of understanding that includes within its sweep the addition of
any integers whatsoever. Likewise, even adults use the base-10 decimal
system and the base-60 decimal system without grasping just what a base
decimal system is. We know that after `_9` the decimal second from the
left becomes `1`, and that the `1` in `10` is in the tens place. And we
know that `30` minutes past the hour is half past. But what we often do
not grasp is the essential feature of the base decimal system is that
every place is the digit multiplied by a number that is the base number
to the power of the index. So, in the base-10 system, the first place is
10^0, the second 10^1, the third 10^2, and so on. In understanding
the pattern b^i, where b is the base and i is the index, one grasps at
once not only base-10, but base-60, base-2, and so on.

Our higher acts of understanding grasp a multiplicity in a single act.
The higher the act, the larger the multiplicity. This does not
demonstrate that God knows in a single act of cognition -- for that we
need the arguments for simplicity -- but it does strongly indicate that
the higher the form of knowledge, the more unitary it is and the broader
its sweep.

### God's actions

Brower, on Hasker's view, proposes a "radical and surprising" solution
to the problem of how the diversity of what God does (and knows) can be
reconciled with God's simplicity: "these propositions not only are not
solely about God's intrinsic state, but they entail *nothing whatever*
concerning that state."[^42] How can we say that God performing an
action involves no internal difference than God not performing an
action? Or for that matter, how can we say that God knowing some fact
about the world makes no difference to God?

The key to answering this question--or at least to understanding the
traditional answer to this question--rests generally on an account of
extrinsic predication and specifically--in St. Thomas' case--on a theory
of *actio* and *operatio*. Brower's solution is neither a radical
revision of the tradition, nor surprising to one familiar with that
tradition. For St. Thomas, predicating any action or act of knowledge of
God save his proper act is by extrinsic denomination.[^43] The question
of the logical coherence of attributing action to God turns on the
logical coherence of extrinsic denomination as it pertains to action.

Consider this example: "God creates the world." What makes the predicate
"creates the world" true? It is the real relation of dependence of the
world upon God. St. Thomas believes that he has shown that insofar as
anything exists, it is due to God's granting that thing existence. The
difference between God granting the thing existence or not is simply
whether the thing is or not. Has a thing existence or not? If the
former, it is from God. "Creates the world" entails no difference in God
from "did not create the world".

St. Thomas is not engaged in special pleading on this point. Causal
predication even in the case of creaturely causality often is a clear
cut case of extrinsic predication. The sun kills the plant. Does the
plant's dying or surviving make some intrinsic difference in the sun?
Clearly not: no intrinsic difference in the sun occurs by a plant's
dying or surviving.[^44] Thus, "kills the plant" is predicated of the
sun by extrinsic denomination: the real difference, the ground in
reality that makes the predication true or false, is in the plant.

The example of the sun need not be taken to imply an emanationist theory
of God's creating the world. We can substitute examples of human
affairs. "The lecturer taught the student" is true if the student
actually learned; it is the intrinsic state of the student, not of the
teacher, that makes that proposition true.

The apparent difficulty that remains, perhaps, is that the teacher
performs a particular action (diagramming on a board or reading a
passage out loud) that is distinctly directed teaching the student. Here
we find both analogous and disanalogous features. The act by which the
lecturer attempts to teach the student (drawing on the blackboard) is
not the actuality that makes it true to predicate "taught the student"
of the lecturer. Likewise, God's proper action is not the act that makes
it true to say that God created the world, though the latter act has a
real dependence on the former. On the other hand, a teacher makes an
attempt--one that may succeed or fail--to teach the student. That act is
directed toward the student's learning, and may or may not achieve its
aim. God's action, on the other hand, cannot fail, and his proper act
has as its end the ultimate good, with which it is identical.

Now Hasker may find incredible the view that God does not have
particular, imminent actions the way we do, but he cannot very well
argue that the tradition has committed a logical contradiction. Discrete
imminent actions are simply not a component of "knowledge", "will", or
"action" as the tradition predicates these terms of God. Knowledge is
the immaterial, intentional presence of a thing;[^45] "will" is either
the enjoyment of the Good[^46] or the ordering of things toward the
Good[^47], and action is the production of an effect. Hasker may find
these notions of knowledge, will, and action unsatisfying, but that is a
different matter than identifying a logical contradiction.

De-Mammalizing God
------------------

The substance of Hasker's argument does not rest in his allegation that
the traditional articulation of divine simplicity involves category
errors and logical inconsistencies. Hasker has not examined the
traditional formulation of divine simplicity, nor distinguished it from
its corollaries and consequents. Nor did Hasker examine the traditional
formulations of divine will, divine knowledge, and divine action to put
it into relation with divine simplicity (a rather critical step in
showing a logical inconsistency, one would think).

Where Hasker's argument has any purchase it is not at the level of
conceptual or logical rigor, but by appealing to a commonsense notion of
God's personality. Hasker puts the case this way: in its strong form,
the doctrine of divine simplicity "has the effect of *dehumanizing
God*."[^48] Hasker's terminology here is as striking as it is
unapologetic, and it helps a great deal in explaining why he finds the
traditional notions of knowledge, will, and action unintelligible. The
explanation is not merely that Hasker has not dealt with those
traditional notions, though this likely plays a large part. It is that
the tradition Hasker belongs to ties its notion of God to the
specifically mammalian aspects of our rational and volitional faculties.

Human beings are intelligent mammals. Our intelligence is bound up with
our animality, and our animality with our rationality. Our knowledge is
gained from our experience, even if it may not be reducible to it. And
the world of our experience is, beyond any doubt, the world of an
upright, social mammal. Quarks and black holes, however real they are,
are not the fare of our ordinary experience. Useful objects that fit in
our hands, homes suited to our size and fit for our biological needs,
the magnitude of the earth beneath us and the sky overhead constitute
our everyday frame of reference, the opinions of those in our social
circles are the norm of our common sense.

It is easy enough to see how our mammalian nature means that our
knowledge is had in the transition from potential to actual knowledge.
Is there food to be had? The infant cranes his neck to the feeling of
another's skin, the hunter-gatherer heads out to his favorite spots, the
employee goes to the store armed with a credit card. We look nearby, and
if we cannot see what we are looking for, we move to a better position,
employ the tools we have available to us, and being social animals we
ask someone else. If that does not work we have more indirect strategies
for deciding whether something is there. We start out not knowing, not
seeing, and we set about finding out. Our instinctive, pre-philosophical
notion of knowledge is that of animal extroversion, which is based
primarily on ocular vision.

It is clear enough why animals like ourselves move from potential to
actual knowledge. We are here, and most of the objects of our daily
concern are located out there. We lack knowledge of things, and our
conduit to knowledge is perception. What is unclear is why the same
should be said of immaterial entities who are not here rather than
there, who, being immaterial, do not have the need for a conduit from
one spatio-temporal point to another, and whose object of concern is not
limited to everyday medium sized objects. The problem is not unique to
God; it encompasses angels as well. We do not know, so we take a look.
But we look with our eyes. Our eyes are receptive (though we can turn
them in this direction or that), and are informed by what stands opposed
to them at some distance. What could it mean for angels to take a look,
or for God? Perhaps an angel turns its attention now to this, now to
that; but that can only be on the basis of something it already knows.
We know things as "out there" because we are here and have senses that
convey what is spatially outside ourselves. Imagining a similar conduit
in the case of an immaterial being only attributes the features and
limitations attendant on materiality.

St. Thomas' answer is clear: we might not know what it is like for
angels or God to know, and we should not attribute to them that are
bound to animality. But while we might not know what it is like for
immaterial beings to know, we can know that they know. It is a
sufficient condition for knowledge that a thing be comprehended
immaterially. Nothing remains uncomprehended by God; God is being
subsisting, and nothing is simply other than being. It follows that God
knows, even if we have no qualitative feel for that knowledge. We should
not expect to.

Conclusion
==========

It may be suggested that Hasker's essay could be charitably and
creatively re-interpreted as a critique not of the traditional notion of
divine simplicity as held by Augustine and Aquinas, but merely as a
critique of how that notion has been interpreted or even misinterpreted
by the contemporary philosophers of religion for whom Hasker devotes the
most space. Yet we can divide these philosophers into two camps: those
who hold to the traditional doctrine, and those who diverge from
it.[^49] To the extent that Hasker aims at those who in fact hold to the
traditional doctrine, the charitable interpretation does nothing to
shield Hasker from the critique I have advanced (namely, that Hasker
does not address or misinterprets key elements of that doctrine). And to
the extent Hasker aims at those who diverge from the traditional notion
of divine simplicity his efforts are irrelevant to his overall thesis:
that the traditional notion of divine simplicity is mistaken. In neither
case does the charitable revision salvage Hasker's arguments.

I have argued in this essay that Hasker's case against the traditional
doctrine of divine simplicity fails. Yet this conclusion is not entirely
negative; the argument also serves as a template for how an evaluation
of divine simplicity would need to proceed. If Hasker's omission of the
notions of essence-existence distinction and the relation between
predication and intrinsic accidents renders an evaluation of divine
simplicity impossible, then, inversely, a pre-condition for
understanding the traditional notion of divine simplicity would be
articulating those notions. If Hasker has operated from a mammalian
notion of knowledge, action, and will, then a successful approach to
divine simplicity would require the examination of knowledge, action,
and will as traditionally attributed to God.

Understanding is a prerequisite for judgment. Grasping the traditional
case for divine simplicity and formulating it accurately a necessary
condition to reaching a judgment on its merits. My argument has been
that Hasker has rushed to judgment on that traditional doctrine. And my
criticisms have operated at the level of understanding: what is the
traditional doctrine of divine simplicity, its corollaries and
consequents, and the broader framework in which it has been situated?
And my concern, like Hasker's, has not remained within the narrow
confines of recent analytic philosophy of religion, but with the broader
tradition, and especially as that tradition stems from St. Thomas.
Unlike Hasker, I have devoted attention to what that tradition actually
says. That tradition not only remains standing after Hasker's critique;
it remains untouched.

Bibliography
============

Hasker, William. "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?" *American Catholic
Philosophical Quarterly* 90, no. 4 (2016): 669-725.

Footnotes
=========

[^1]: William Hasker, "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", *American
    Catholic Philosophical Quarterly* 90 (No. 4) 2016 669-725, p. 725.

[^2]: Hasker 2016, p. 725.

[^3]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?" p. 699.

[^4]: Ibid 699-700.

[^5]: Hasker does briefly cite an article by Brian Leftow for a short
    account of Augustine's position, but the mention is brief and plays
    little role in Hasker's overall argument.

[^6]: Aquinas is cited in footnotes 4, 20, 57, 58; John Wippel's
    **Metaphysical Themes in Thomas Aquinas II** is quoted on p. 709.
    Stump, Brower, and Dolezal all use St. Thomas as a resource in
    contemporary debates.

[^7]: Ibid. 701 - 702.

[^8]: Ibid. 703.

[^9]: See *De Ente* 4.6.

[^10]: Ibid. 713.

[^11]: Treatment of this question abound in St. Thomas' corpus. See, for
    instance, DV Q. 24, art 3, Q. 23 art 1, and SCG I.82.

[^12]: "Is Divine Simplicity a mistake?", p. 702.

[^13]: "Is Divine Simplicity a mistake?", p. 705.

[^14]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake", p. 706.

[^15]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake", p. 707.

[^16]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 708.

[^17]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", pp. 712 - 713.

[^18]: If this remark seems puzzling, recall that a subject is one
    actualized by accidents; and that in the case of knowing, our
    possible intellects are actualized by the forms of things. Our
    knowledge is passive. But for the traditional view, God's knowledge
    is not passive but active, not receptive but creative. God is not a
    subject that receives forms, and hence not a conscious subject.

[^19]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 703.

[^20]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 713.

[^21]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 712. Hasker acknowledges
    that not everyone finds this notion unintelligible, and so offers an
    argument. But the argument is explicitly premised upon God being a
    "conscious mental subject", in defense of which Hasker notes that he
    cannot imagine how anyone would disagree.

[^22]: The best short overview on the subject is St. Thomas' *De Ente*.

[^23]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 703.

[^24]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 701; cf *SCG* I.18 3-5.

[^25]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 701.

[^26]: /SCG/ I.18 2.

[^27]: And when Aquinas does use the term *partes* in this chapter, he
    clearly does so in the broad sense, one not restricted to material
    parts. See e.g., *SCG* I.18 2.

[^28]: See, e.g., *DE* 5, *ST* I qs. 2-3, *SCG* I ch. 13-18.

[^29]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 702.

[^30]: See Hasker's
    [interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pzer4Tp3Mf0) with Dale
    Tuggy, at the 22 minute mark.

[^31]: /ST/ I.28 1, 3.

[^32]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 704.

[^33]: The best scholarly treatment of which I am aware on this subject
    may be found in Bernard Lonergan's **Grace and Freedom** I-4 (2000
    ed.).

[^34]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 705.

[^35]: See, for instance, St. Thomas Aquinas, *Compendium of Theology*
    sections 23 - 27.

[^36]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", 706.

[^37]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", 706.

[^38]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", 709.

[^39]: /ST/ I, q. 3 prol.

[^40]: /ST/ I, q. 14, art 11, *SCG* I.65, *DV* 2.7, all take as their
    subject this exact question.

[^41]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 709.

[^42]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p 710.

[^43]: See, for instance, St. Thomas distinction at *ST* I q. 25, art. 1
    ad 3.

[^44]: It may be objected that this is an empirical question for
    astro-physicists, but this only makes the point. If the sun's
    killing the plant does involve some slight effect on the sun itself,
    this is an empirical question, and its affirmative answer runs
    contrary to expectation.

[^45]: See *ST* I q. 14, art. 1.

[^46]: See *ST* I, q. 19, art. 1.

[^47]: See *ST* I, q. 19, art. 2.

[^48]: "Is Divine Simplicity a Mistake?", p. 719.

[^49]: Of course, a writer may hold to certain elements and diverge from
    other elements. In that case, we can divide positions, rather than
    writers, into the categories of those that hold to the classical
    doctrine, and those that do not.
